README.md, before:

# Converting rotas into iCalendar files

[HOME](https://zeripath.github.io/sample-rota-converters)

## Rationale
Doctors in the UK often rotate jobs multiple times a year, and with each job comes a new rota.
A new rota in a new format, often complex, almost always written as an excel spreadsheet, and
updated at random.

Almost every doctor has a mobile phone, on which there is a calendar application. Some doctors
will do the painstaking task of manually converting that rota into events to be put on that application.
Others will try to keep a copy of it on their phones, and others will print the rota out and put
it on their wall.

We can do better.

## Why is manually converting rotas bad?

1. It's time consuming and repetitive - Humans are bad at doing this, but computers are good at.
2. The rota will change and you will have to do that work again.
3. If you can do this for your rota - you can do it for everyone!

## What should we do?

Our calendar applications have a standard format for events, called the `iCalendar` format - standard suffix `.ics`

This is defined at <https://icalendar.org>, wikipedia has a good description of it <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICalendar>.

If we can convert our rotas to `.ics` files we can either import them into our calendar applications, or, even better, stick on a website and point our applications to.

## Plan
1. [Introduce the icalendar format](icalendar)
2. [Look at a very simple rota and write a simple converter](simple-rota/part-1)
3. [Refine this converter](simple-rota/part-2)
4. [Consider the problems of the converter](simple-rota/part-3)

Commit message:

Add multi-person multi-shift rotas

README.md, after:

# Converting rotas into iCalendar files

[HOME](https://zeripath.github.io/sample-rota-converters)

## Rationale
Doctors in the UK often rotate jobs multiple times a year, and with each job comes a new rota.
A new rota in a new format, often complex, almost always written as an excel spreadsheet, and
updated at random.

Almost every doctor has a mobile phone, on which there is a calendar application. Some doctors
will do the painstaking task of manually converting that rota into events to be put on that application.
Others will try to keep a copy of it on their phones, and others will print the rota out and put
it on their wall.

We can do better.

## Why is manually converting rotas bad?

1. It's time consuming and repetitive - Humans are bad at doing this, but computers are good at.
2. The rota will change and you will have to do that work again.
3. If you can do this for your rota - you can do it for everyone!

## What should we do?

Our calendar applications have a standard format for events, called the `iCalendar` format - standard suffix `.ics`

This is defined at <https://icalendar.org>, wikipedia has a good description of it <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICalendar>.

If we can convert our rotas to `.ics` files we can either import them into our calendar applications, or, even better, stick on a website and point our applications to.

## Plan
* [Introduce the icalendar format](icalendar)
* Simple-Rota
  1. [Look at a very simple rota and write a simple converter](simple-rota/part-1)
  2. [Refine this converter](simple-rota/part-2)
  3. [Consider the problems of the converter](simple-rota/part-3)
* Multi-Rota
  1. [Multiple shift - multiple person rotas](multi-rota/part-1)
