multi-rota/part-1.md, before:

# Multiple shift - multiple person rotas

[HOME](https://zeripath.github.io/sample-rota-converters)

So we can convert a simple rota like [simple_rota.csv](../simple-rota/simple_rota.csv), but most of our rotas aren't anywhere as simple. Let's do some baby steps, let's consider:

```csv
"Date", "SHO", "SpR", "Consultant"
"29/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"30/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"31/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"01/02/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"02/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"03/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"04/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"05/02/2018", "Angela", "Jane", "Smith"
```
etc.

Now we want to create rotas for the SHOs, SpRs and the consultants. We'll need their hours.



```python
from datetime import time, timedelta
import pytz

TZ = pytz.timezone('Europe/London')

HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

If we look at [simple_rota3.py](../simple-rota/simple_rota3.py) we're going to need to look again at `handle_rows`



```python
# simple_rota3.py
def handle_rows(rows, name_to_list_of_rows_dict):
    """Store the rota information by name"""
    for row in rows:
        name = row['On-Call']
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ name ].append(row)
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ 'All' ].append(row)
```

Now, there are mulitple ways of dealing with this, depending on how the rota co-ordinator works. If it's the case that the same name in the a different column is a different person then we'll need to store the job with the name - we should probably do that in any case - if an SpR acts down or SHO acts up it will probably be marked in some other way. 


```python
# multi_rota.py
def handle_rows(rows, name_to_list_of_rows_dict):
    """Store the rota information by name and job"""
    for row in rows:
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ ('All', 'All') ].append(row)
        for key in row:
            if key != 'Date':
                name = row[key]
                name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ (name, key) ].append(row)
```

We'll also have to adjust `create_event_for` and  `create_calendar_for` and pass in the name and job, change the summary and description to include more information, and adjust the hours based on the job.


```python
def create_calendar_for(name, job, rows):
    """Create a calendar for name in job using the provided rows"""
    # Create a basic iCalendar object
    cal = Calendar()

    # These two lines are required but you can change the prodid slightly
    cal.add('prodid', '-//hacksw/handcal/NONSGML v1.0//EN')
    cal.add('version', '2.0')

    # This means that your calendar gets a nice default name
    cal.add('x-wr-calname', 'Simple rota for %s (%s)' % (name, job))
    
    # Now open the rota
    if job == 'All':
        for row in rows:
            for key in row:
                if key != 'Date':
                    event = create_event_for(row[key], key, row)
                    cal.add_component(event)
    else:    
        for row in rows:
            event = create_event_for(name, job, row)
            cal.add_component(event)
        
    return cal

def create_event_for(name, job, row):
    """Create an icalendar event for this row for name and job"""
    event = Event()
    
    # Description should say who else is in department
    description = '{0}: {1} with '.format(job, name)
    others_d = ', '.join([ '{0}: {1}'.format(key, row[key]) \
                          for key in row \
                         if key not in ['Date', job]])
    event.add('description', description + others_d)
    
    # Change the summary to say the same.
    event.add('summary', description + others_id)
    
    # Look up the start time in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('dtstart', 
              datetime.combine(
                  convert_to_date(row['Date']),
                  HOURS[job]['start']))
    
    # Similarly look up the duration in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('duration', HOURS[job]['duration'])
    
    event.add('dtstamp', datetime.now())
    event.add('location', 'At work') # Set this to something useful
    event.add('uid', uuid.uuid4())
    return event
```

Which of course means we'll have to adjust `check_last_names` and `create_calendars` too


```python
## Check last names functions
def check_last_names(name_to_list_of_rows_dict, directory):
    """Check from the previous run of this parser if there are new names, returns a dictionary of names to number of rows"""
    from os.path import exists, join
    from csv import DictReader, DictWriter
    
    last_names = {}
    # Read the last names 
    if exists(join(directory, 'last_names.csv')):
        with open(join(directory, 'last_names.csv')) as f:
            r = DictReader(f)
            for row in r:
                last_names[(row['name'], row['job'])] = int(row['number'])
    
    name_to_number_of_rows = {}
    with open(join(directory, 'last_names.csv'), 'w') as f:
        w = DictWriter(f, ['name', 'job', 'number'])
        w.writeheader()
        for name, job in name_to_list_of_rows_dict:
            number = len(name_to_list_of_rows_dict[(name, job)])
            if not (name, job) in last_names:
                # We have a new name
                print('New name in rota: %s (%s) with %d rows' % (name, job, number))
            w.writerow( { 'name': name, 'job': job, 'number': number } )
            name_to_number_of_rows[(name, job)] = number
    
    return name_to_number_of_rows

## Writing functions
def create_calendars(name_to_list_of_rows_dict, directory):
    from os.path import join
    for name, job in name_to_list_of_rows_dict:
        rows = name_to_list_of_rows_dict[name]
        cal = create_calendar_for(name, job, rows)
        with open(join(directory, 'rota_%s_%s.ics' % (job, name)), 'wb') as f:
            f.write(cal.to_ical())
```

Now if you make those changes, you'll see that the consultant's shift covers two days, which if you think about it - it does. However, the UI is somewhat unhelpful and it may be better to change the consultant's hours from starting at 8am to midnight.


```python
from datetime import time, timedelta
import pytz

TZ = pytz.timezone('Europe/London')

HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {
        'start': time(0, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

Which does solve the issue of consultant's shifts covering two days - but is marked (at least on Google Calendar) with a preceding start time. Can we get rid of this?

First we need to change the `HOURS` dictionary again to omit a start time:


```python
 HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {        
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

And then adjust the `create_event_for` function:


```python
def create_event_for(name, job, row):
    """Create an icalendar event for this row for name and job"""
    event = Event()
    
    # Description should say who else is in department.
    description = '{1}: {0} with '.format(name, job)
    others_d = ', '.join([ '{1}: {0}'.format(key, row[key]) \
                          for key in row \
                         if key not in ['Date', job]])
    event.add('description', description + others_d)
    
    # Make the summary the same as the description
    event.add('summary', description + others_d)
    
    if 'start' in HOURS[job]:
        # If we have a start time in the HOURS dictionary for this job - combine it with date
        event.add('dtstart', 
                  datetime.combine(
                      convert_to_date(row['Date']),
                      HOURS[job]['start']))
    else:
        # Otherwise just use the date
        event.add('dtstart', convert_to_date(row['Date']).date())

    # Look up the duration in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('duration', HOURS[job]['duration'])

    event.add('dtstamp', datetime.now())
    event.add('location', 'At work') # Set this to something useful
    event.add('uid', uuid.uuid4())
    return event
```

This changes the `VEVENT` from:

```ics
BEGIN:VEVENT
SUMMARY:Consultant: Jones
DTSTART;TZID=Europe/London;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20180208T000000
DURATION:P1D
DTSTAMP;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20171116T115729Z
UID:845cf2b4-64a3-4dc0-819d-bf8cf473b4e1
DESCRIPTION:Consultant: Jones with Angela: SHO\, Jane: SpR
LOCATION:At work
END:VEVENT
```

to

```ics
BEGIN:VEVENT
SUMMARY:Consultant: Jones
DTSTART;VALUE=DATE:20180208
DURATION:P1D
DTSTAMP;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20171116T115729Z
UID:845cf2b4-64a3-4dc0-819d-bf8cf473b4e1
DESCRIPTION:Consultant: Jones with Angela: SHO\, Jane: SpR
LOCATION:At work
END:VEVENT
```

(hint look at the `DTSTART` value.)

meaning that the event is treated like an all-day event. 

* _Can you think of anything that should be treated as an all day event?_

Right, I think we've got a good enough reader for that rota, and I've made the above changes and put them in [multi_rota.py](multi_rota.py)

[Back](../)

Commit message:

Fix rendering of the multirota and use return for the read fns

multi-rota/part-1.md, after:

# Multiple shift - multiple person rotas

[HOME](https://zeripath.github.io/sample-rota-converters)

So we can convert a simple rota like [simple_rota.csv](../simple-rota/simple_rota.csv), but most of our rotas aren't anywhere as simple. Let's do some baby steps, let's consider:

```csv
"Date", "SHO", "SpR", "Consultant"
"29/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"30/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"31/01/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"01/02/2018", "James", "Martin", "Positano"
"02/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"03/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"04/02/2018", "Becky", "Peter", "Positano"
"05/02/2018", "Angela", "Jane", "Smith"
```
etc.

Now we want to create rotas for the SHOs, SpRs and the consultants. We'll need their hours.



```python
from datetime import time, timedelta
import pytz

TZ = pytz.timezone('Europe/London')

HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

If we look at [simple_rota3.py](../simple-rota/simple_rota3.py) we're going to need to look again at `handle_rows`



```python
# simple_rota3.py
def handle_rows(rows, name_to_list_of_rows_dict):
    """Store the rota information by name"""
    name_to_list_of_rows_dict = defaultdict(list)
    for row in rows:
        name = row['On-Call']
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ name ].append(row)
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ 'All' ].append(row)
    return name_to_list_of_rows_dict
```

Now, there are mulitple ways of dealing with this, depending on how the rota co-ordinator works. If it's the case that the same name in the a different column is a different person then we'll need to store the job with the name - we should probably do that in any case - if an SpR acts down or SHO acts up it will probably be marked in some other way. 


```python
# multi_rota.py
def handle_rows(rows, name_to_list_of_rows_dict):
    """Store the rota information by name and job"""
    name_to_list_of_rows_dict = defaultdict(list)
    for row in rows:
        name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ ('All', 'All') ].append(row)
        for key in row:
            if key != 'Date':
                name = row[key]
                name_to_list_of_rows_dict[ (name, key) ].append(row)
    return name_to_list_of_rows_dict
```

We'll also have to adjust `create_event_for` and  `create_calendar_for` and pass in the name and job, change the summary and description to include more information, and adjust the hours based on the job.


```python
def create_calendar_for(name, job, rows):
    """Create a calendar for name in job using the provided rows"""
    # Create a basic iCalendar object
    cal = Calendar()

    # These two lines are required but you can change the prodid slightly
    cal.add('prodid', '-//hacksw/handcal/NONSGML v1.0//EN')
    cal.add('version', '2.0')

    # This means that your calendar gets a nice default name
    cal.add('x-wr-calname', 'Simple rota for %s (%s)' % (name, job))
    
    # Now open the rota
    if job == 'All':
        for row in rows:
            for key in row:
                if key != 'Date':
                    event = create_event_for(row[key], key, row)
                    cal.add_component(event)
    else:    
        for row in rows:
            event = create_event_for(name, job, row)
            cal.add_component(event)
        
    return cal

def create_event_for(name, job, row):
    """Create an icalendar event for this row for name and job"""
    event = Event()
    
    # Description should say who else is in department
    description = '{0}: {1} with '.format(job, name)
    others_d = ', '.join([ '{0}: {1}'.format(key, row[key]) \
                          for key in row \
                         if key not in ['Date', job]])
    event.add('description', description + others_d)
    
    # Change the summary to say the same.
    event.add('summary', description + others_id)
    
    # Look up the start time in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('dtstart', 
              datetime.combine(
                  convert_to_date(row['Date']),
                  HOURS[job]['start']))
    
    # Similarly look up the duration in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('duration', HOURS[job]['duration'])
    
    event.add('dtstamp', datetime.now())
    event.add('location', 'At work') # Set this to something useful
    event.add('uid', uuid.uuid4())
    return event
```

Which of course means we'll have to adjust `check_last_names` and `create_calendars` too


```python
## Check last names functions
def check_last_names(name_to_list_of_rows_dict, directory):
    """Check from the previous run of this parser if there are new names, returns a dictionary of names to number of rows"""
    from os.path import exists, join
    from csv import DictReader, DictWriter
    
    last_names = {}
    # Read the last names 
    if exists(join(directory, 'last_names.csv')):
        with open(join(directory, 'last_names.csv')) as f:
            r = DictReader(f)
            for row in r:
                last_names[(row['name'], row['job'])] = int(row['number'])
    
    name_to_number_of_rows = {}
    with open(join(directory, 'last_names.csv'), 'w') as f:
        w = DictWriter(f, ['name', 'job', 'number'])
        w.writeheader()
        for name, job in name_to_list_of_rows_dict:
            number = len(name_to_list_of_rows_dict[(name, job)])
            if not (name, job) in last_names:
                # We have a new name
                print('New name in rota: %s (%s) with %d rows' % (name, job, number))
            w.writerow( { 'name': name, 'job': job, 'number': number } )
            name_to_number_of_rows[(name, job)] = number
    
    return name_to_number_of_rows

## Writing functions
def create_calendars(name_to_list_of_rows_dict, directory):
    from os.path import join
    for name, job in name_to_list_of_rows_dict:
        rows = name_to_list_of_rows_dict[name]
        cal = create_calendar_for(name, job, rows)
        with open(join(directory, 'rota_%s_%s.ics' % (job, name)), 'wb') as f:
            f.write(cal.to_ical())
```

Now if you make those changes, you'll see that the consultant's shift covers two days, which if you think about it - it does. However, the UI is somewhat unhelpful and it may be better to change the consultant's hours from starting at 8am to midnight.


```python
from datetime import time, timedelta
import pytz

TZ = pytz.timezone('Europe/London')

HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {
        'start': time(0, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

Which does solve the issue of consultant's shifts covering two days - but is marked (at least on Google Calendar) with a preceding start time. Can we get rid of this?

First we need to change the `HOURS` dictionary again to omit a start time:


```python
 HOURS = {
    'SHO': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'SpR': {
        'start': time(8, tzinfo=TZ),
        'duration': timedelta(hours=12)
    },
    'Consultant': {        
        'duration': timedelta(days=1)
    }
}
```

And then adjust the `create_event_for` function:


```python
def create_event_for(name, job, row):
    """Create an icalendar event for this row for name and job"""
    event = Event()
    
    # Description should say who else is in department.
    description = '{1}: {0} with '.format(name, job)
    others_d = ', '.join([ '{1}: {0}'.format(key, row[key]) \
                          for key in row \
                         if key not in ['Date', job]])
    event.add('description', description + others_d)
    
    # Make the summary the same as the description
    event.add('summary', description + others_d)
    
    if 'start' in HOURS[job]:
        # If we have a start time in the HOURS dictionary for this job - combine it with date
        event.add('dtstart', 
                  datetime.combine(
                      convert_to_date(row['Date']),
                      HOURS[job]['start']))
    else:
        # Otherwise just use the date
        event.add('dtstart', convert_to_date(row['Date']).date())

    # Look up the duration in the HOURS dictionary
    event.add('duration', HOURS[job]['duration'])

    event.add('dtstamp', datetime.now())
    event.add('location', 'At work') # Set this to something useful
    event.add('uid', uuid.uuid4())
    return event
```

This changes the `VEVENT` from:

```ics
BEGIN:VEVENT
SUMMARY:Consultant: Jones
DTSTART;TZID=Europe/London;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20180208T000000
DURATION:P1D
DTSTAMP;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20171116T115729Z
UID:845cf2b4-64a3-4dc0-819d-bf8cf473b4e1
DESCRIPTION:Consultant: Jones with Angela: SHO\, Jane: SpR
LOCATION:At work
END:VEVENT
```

to

```ics
BEGIN:VEVENT
SUMMARY:Consultant: Jones
DTSTART;VALUE=DATE:20180208
DURATION:P1D
DTSTAMP;VALUE=DATE-TIME:20171116T115729Z
UID:845cf2b4-64a3-4dc0-819d-bf8cf473b4e1
DESCRIPTION:Consultant: Jones with Angela: SHO\, Jane: SpR
LOCATION:At work
END:VEVENT
```

(hint look at the `DTSTART` value.)

meaning that the event is treated like an all-day event. 

* _Can you think of anything that should be treated as an all day event?_

Right, I think we've got a good enough reader for that rota, and I've made the above changes and put them in [multi_rota.py](multi_rota.py)

[Back](../)
